Mr Speaker, I move that the Bill now be read a second time.
INTRODUCTION
This Budget is designed to meet the big challenges of the future.
It is a Budget that strengthens Australia’s economic foundations, and delivers for
working families under pressure.
It is the responsible Budget our nation needs at this time of international turbulence,
and high inflation at home.
A Budget carefully designed to fight inflation, and ensure we meet the uncertainties of
the future from a position of strength.
A Budget with a $55 billion Working Families Support Package at its very core.
A Budget that begins a new era of strategic investment in Australia’s future challenges
and opportunities.
And a Budget that helps plan, finance and secure Australia’s long-term national
security and defence needs.
These are the commitments the Government gave to the Australian people at the
election. Mr Speaker, this Budget honours those commitments.
The Government has made sure every single cent of new spending for the coming year
has been more than met by savings elsewhere in the Budget.

Our commitments have been honoured by redirecting spending. Difficult spending
cuts have helped fund our Working Families Support Package and our new priorities
for the nation.
We are budgeting for a surplus of $21.7 billion in 2008-09, 1.8 per cent of GDP, the
largest budget surplus as a share of GDP in nearly a decade.
This honours and exceeds the 1.5 per cent target we set in January, without relying on
revenue windfalls.
It is a surplus built on substantial savings of $33 billion over four years, including
$7 billion in 2008-09 alone.
And it is a surplus built on disciplined spending, with the lowest real increase in
Government spending in nearly a decade; spending growth which is one quarter of the
average of the previous four years.
Mr Speaker, we need a strong surplus to anchor a strong economy; to do our bit to ease
inflationary pressures in the economy; to build a buffer against international
turbulence; and so we can fund ongoing long term investment in the ports, roads,
railways, hospitals, universities and vocational education we need, to deliver growth
with low inflation into the future.
ECONOMIC OUTLOOK
Mr Speaker, these are challenging times. Countervailing forces are creating high
inflation at home and economic turbulence abroad.
Weaker global growth and the effects of monetary policy are slowing our economy.
Inflation has increased in recent years, pushing up interest rates, and putting more
pressure on families. Eight interest rate rises in three years, and the global slowdown,
are expected to see growth in our economy moderate to 2¾ per cent in 2008-09.
Potent forces in the global economy are pushing Australia in opposite directions.
Slower growth in the United States and turbulence in world financial markets are
affecting many countries, including our own. At the same time, the prices of our
exports are rising strongly, when domestic inflationary pressures are already high.
Robust growth in emerging economies, particularly China and India, is expected to
drive further large rises in Australia’s terms of trade, boosting income and price
pressures. The terms of trade are anticipated to rise by over 20 per cent by the end of
this year. This will be the largest increase in a generation, lifting nominal economic
growth to 9¼ per cent, the highest rise in 19 years.
3
The Australian economy is enjoying its 17th year of growth, now spanning three
governments. But productivity growth over the last five years has averaged
1.4 per cent a year, the lowest in 17 years. And capacity constraints have put upward
pressure on inflation.
When the Government came to office less than six months ago, Australia was facing
the highest levels of domestic inflation in over 16 years, and inflation reached
4.2 per cent in the March quarter. The price of bread has risen over 18 per cent in the
last two years alone.
Inflation is a drag on growth. It saps confidence, and hurts families and businesses
throughout Australia. We are working to put downward pressure on inflation so that
we can ease the cost of living and interest rate pressures on working families.
Our nation also faces longer term challenges and opportunities, in the form of an
ageing population, the economic effects of the rise of China and India, and the
consequences of climate change.
With careful, responsible economic management, we are confident we can meet these
challenges.
DELIVERING FOR WORKING FAMILIES
Mr Speaker, in framing this Budget, foremost in our considerations are the Australians
who work hard, pay their taxes, and demand little more than a fair go.
This Government understands the stress on working families in these difficult times.
More and more family income is being eaten away in mortgage repayments, rent,
groceries and petrol — leaving so many families feeling the pinch.
That’s why a key priority of this Budget is to deliver the Working Families Support
Package. The $55 billion package comprises targeted initiatives in tax, child care,
education, housing, and other essential components of family budgets.
Personal income tax cuts
For too long, working families have watched the proceeds of the boom directed
elsewhere, in the form of tax cuts skewed to those already doing very well.
Tonight we tip the scales in favour of working families.
The Government will fully implement our promise to reduce personal income tax by
$47 billion over four years. This tax cut is directed to low and middle income
families — the backbone of the economy.
4
These tax cuts will allow low-income earners, including part-time workers, to keep
more of their income and ease the financial pressure on families. And they will provide
further incentives to participate in the workforce.
From 1 July 2008, a worker on $48,000 — average weekly earnings — will receive a
weekly tax cut of $20. And low income workers earning $14,000 or less will pay no tax
at all.
We will make the Medicare Levy Surcharge fairer. The Government will increase the
income thresholds from $50,000 to $100,000 a year for singles and from $100,000 to
$150,000 a year for couples.
Child care costs
Mr Speaker, the Government will ease the burden of child care costs, and make it
easier for parents who wish to return to work, by increasing the Child Care Tax Rebate
from 30 per cent to 50 per cent. This will ensure that, in addition to any Child Care
Benefit payable, half of a family’s out of pocket child care costs will be met every year.
The cap on the amount that can be paid will be lifted from $4,354 to $7,500 per child,
and the Government will pay the 50 per cent Child Care Tax Rebate quarterly, to
ensure support is available when it is most needed. The total cost of these reforms is
$1.6 billion over four years.
Education costs
The Government will support parents who are providing opportunities for their
children by investing in their education, with a new Education Tax Refund, costing
$4.4 billion over four years. We have funded this in large part by redirecting tax cuts
for people earning more than $180,000 a year.
From 1 July 2008, eligible parents will be able to claim a 50 per cent refund on eligible
education expenses for children undertaking primary or secondary school studies —
up to $375 for a primary schooler and up to $750 for a secondary school child each
year.
Improving housing affordability
Mr Speaker, the Government’s $2.2 billion housing affordability package will help
working families who are struggling with the housing affordability crisis.
We will introduce enhanced First Home Saver Accounts. The first $5,000 of individual
contributions will now attract a Government contribution of 17 per cent, earnings will
be taxed at a low rate of 15 per cent, and withdrawals will be tax-free if used to buy or
build a first home. The Government will provide assistance of $1.2 billion over four
years through the Accounts.
5
To improve housing supply, and lower prices for homebuyers, the Housing
Affordability Fund, worth $500 million over five years, will help reduce the cost of
providing new housing infrastructure and cut red-tape in development approvals.
And to reduce rental costs, the National Rental Affordability Scheme will encourage
the construction of up to 50,000 new affordable rental properties by 2011-12, at a cost of
$623 million over four years.
Supporting older Australians and carers
Mr Speaker, the Government recognises the contribution of older Australians and
carers to our community.
To assist them with rising costs, the Government will provide, by 30 June 2008, one-off
lump-sum payments of $500 to eligible senior Australians, $1,000 to Carer Payment
recipients, and $600 to Carer Allowance recipients for each eligible person in their care,
at a total cost of $1.8 billion.
Pensioners have begun to receive a higher Utilities Allowance of $500, up from
$107.20. Self funded retirees with a Commonwealth Seniors Health Card now receive a
higher Seniors Concession Allowance of $500 per year, up from $218.
To offer further protection for older Australians against rising living costs, the
Government will enhance indexation of the age pension.
The Government is making assessment rules for Carer Payment (Child) fairer by
expanding eligibility to cases where a child’s disability creates additional caring needs
for parents or requires long periods of hospitalisation.
Under the new rules, an additional 19,000 carers of children with severe disability will
be entitled to access this payment in 2009-10, at a cost of $274 million over five years.
This measure brings the total additional assistance provided to carers to $1.1 billion
over five years.
Aged care providers will benefit from an increase in the Conditional Adjustment
Payment, resulting in an additional $408 million for the industry over the next four
years.
Easing cost of living pressures
Mr Speaker, the Government is responding to legitimate community concerns about
the cost of essential goods such as groceries and petrol.
We have provided the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission with tough
new powers, and we will introduce the first ever National Fuelwatch Scheme, in
December this year, helping motorists find the best possible deal at the bowser.
6
The Government is doubling funding to expand financial counselling services to help
families better manage their finances and their mortgages.
NEW ERA OF RESPONSIBLE ECONOMIC MANAGEMENT
Mr Speaker, this Budget begins a new era of responsible economic management.
The Government believes there is an economic case for cutting government spending.
It is this discipline that will place downward pressure on inflation, give us a buffer in a
time of difficult economic conditions, and begin overdue investment in our future.
We have honoured our commitment to deliver a budget surplus of at least 1.5 per cent
of GDP, and gone further to budget for a surplus of 1.8 per cent. The previous
Government forecast a surplus of only 1.2 per cent for 2008-09.
The Government is reducing spending on programs that do not meet our objectives in
the most cost-effective manner.
We are applying an additional two per cent efficiency dividend to most Australian
Government agencies, producing savings of $1.8 billion over five years.
Every single dollar of new spending is more than offset by savings. We have delivered
our commitments by redirecting spending to more pressing priorities.
Fairness and integrity in the tax and transfer systems
We have decided to redirect welfare payments to where they are needed most.
The Government does not believe hard earned tax dollars are best spent on cash
payments to the wealthiest Australians. It is simply not defensible.
So from 1 July 2008, an income test will be introduced so that Family Tax Benefit Part B
will only be available to families in which the principal earner does not have an annual
income exceeding $150,000.
From 1 July 2008 we will increase the Baby Bonus to $5,000. From 1 January 2009, an
income test will be introduced so that it will only be available where family income is
not more than $150,000 a year.
From 1 July 2008 the tax rate for luxury vehicles will be increased from 25 per cent to
33 per cent.
Tax rules for employee share schemes will be amended to prevent unfair tax
minimisation.
7
We are removing the crude oil excise exemption for condensate, increasing the
financial return to the community from the extraction of this non-renewable resource.
To those Australians we have asked tonight to play a role in the fight against inflation,
I say this Government did not take these decisions to cut spending lightly.
Mr Speaker, some Australians have been asked to bear a greater burden than others,
that’s true. But in the end, if we’re to beat inflation and build prosperity, we have no
choice. We simply cannot go on as before, spending irresponsibly, and allowing
inflation to build.
MEETING OUR COMMITMENTS
Mr Speaker, this Budget honours the Government’s commitments, and allows us to
look Australians in the eye and say we delivered the policies they voted for last
November. We are doing what we said we would do.
We are providing new leadership in education, health, infrastructure, climate change
and modernising the federation, to end the blame game.
And we will begin tackling the big challenges on Australia’s horizon, by providing
long-term plans, not short-term bandaid fixes.
Education Revolution
Mr Speaker, tonight we begin to honour the Government’s commitment to an
Education Revolution, with an additional $5.9 billion in funding over the next five
years.
Just one year ago, from the other side of this House, we promised $2.5 billion for Trade
Training Centres in our schools. Tonight it gives us immense pleasure to announce we
are funding that promise.
We will provide $1.2 billion over five years to provide up to $1 million per school to
deliver computers and communications technologies to all students in Years 9 to 12, as
part of the Government’s Digital Education Revolution.
We will honour our commitment to providing all four year olds with access to
15 hours a week, 40 weeks a year, of early childhood education by 2013.
Our Skilling Australia program will increase and deepen the skills capacity of the
Australian workforce. A key initiative is the provision of $1.9 billion over five years to
deliver up to 630,000 additional training places to fill skills shortages.
8
And to boost the research capacity that underpins innovation, we will invest
$326 million on Future Fellowships for top mid-career researchers, and $209 million to
double the number of Australian Postgraduate Awards for PhD or Masters students.
Better hospitals and health services
Mr Speaker, we have put up our hand and accepted responsibility for improving the
health system. No more buck passing. No more blame shifting.
The Government’s National Health and Hospitals Reform Plan will revitalise the public
health system. In this Budget we are committing to an extra $3.2 billion over five years
to public health.
The Government is determined to bring a greater focus on preventative health. Our
National Binge Drinking Strategy brings the tax treatment of ‘ready-to-drink’ alcoholic
beverages in line with full-strength spirits to help address binge drinking among
young Australians, particularly young women. We will work with the States and draw
from the revenue raised to fund preventative health measures.
Tackling climate change
Mr Speaker, the Government is addressing the fundamental environmental and
economic challenge of climate change. We have ratified the Kyoto Protocol, and begun
work on an emissions trading scheme and a national renewable energy target.
This Budget includes measures totalling $2.3 billion over five years to help reduce
Australia’s greenhouse emissions, adapt to climate change, and ensure we show global
leadership in the transition to a low emissions economy.
Funding includes $500 million over eight years for clean coal, $500 million over
six years for renewable energy, and $150 million over four years for energy innovation.
The Government will assist working families to reduce household emissions with a
range of initiatives, including the Green Loans program costing $300 million over
five years.
Supporting business
Mr Speaker, the Government supports the aspirations of Australian business,
including small business, for a simpler tax system and less regulation.
Our nation has the potential to be a financial services hub in the Asia Pacific Region —
the fastest growing region in the world. To support this ambition, the Budget begins
the process of significantly reducing the withholding tax, by reducing the current
interim rate of 30 per cent to a final rate of 7.5 per cent for most non-resident investors.
9
This Budget confirms our commitment to a comprehensive agenda of regulation
reform — cutting red tape and making it easier for business, particularly small
business, to deal with government.
To improve innovation and productivity, the Government will invest $251 million over
five years to establish Enterprise Connect Innovation Centres.
Regional and Rural Australia
Mr Speaker, at the election we promised to be a Government for all Australians. For
rural and regional Australia, and for Indigenous Australia.
Rural Australia has been going through the worst drought in a hundred years. The
Government’s $12.9 billion ten-year national water policy framework Water for the
Future brings a comprehensive and coordinated approach to water supplies.
We will invest $2.2 billion over five years for the Caring for our Country program, to
bring an integrated approach to our natural resource management.
To assist regional communities in achieving their economic potential, we will invest
$176 million as part of our Better Regions initiatives.
And we will provide $271 million over four years to fund the Australian Broadband
Guarantee, ensuring all Australians, particularly those in regional and rural areas,
have equitable access to ’metro-comparable’ broadband services.
Indigenous Australia
Mr Speaker, the Government is working closely with the States to close the gap in
Indigenous disadvantage. This is a long-term challenge for our nation.
As an initial step, the Government will invest an additional: $90 million over five years
for child and maternal health services; $99 million over five years for additional
teachers in the Northern Territory; and $56 million over four years for an expansion of
literacy and numeracy programs.
National security
Mr Speaker, a major priority in this Budget is strengthening Australia’s national
security. It delivers on the Government’s commitment to provide 3 per cent real
growth per year on average in Defence’s underlying funding base to 2015-16, and
extends this commitment to 2017-18.
As the Defence White Paper is implemented, real growth in total Defence spending is
expected to average 4 per cent per year over the next four years. On current
10
projections, Defence spending is expected to be around $6 billion more in 2011-12 than
in 2007-08.
We will continue to support our military in Afghanistan, Solomon Islands, East Timor
and Iraq, until our combat forces in that country are withdrawn.
And we will increase overseas development assistance to around $3.7 billion in
2008-09, from about $3.2 billion. This is critical for alleviating poverty, and building
security in our region. It is the first step in delivering our long-standing commitment
to increase Official Development Assistance to 0.5 per cent of Gross National Income
by 2015-16.
INVESTING IN THE FUTURE
Mr Speaker, for too long our national budgets have been short-sighted.
For too long, our national budgets have focussed on the next election, not the big
challenges facing our country in the next decade and beyond.
For too long, our national budgets have squandered the proceeds of the mining boom
and failed to invest properly in our country’s future.
Tonight, we begin a new era of investing in Australia’s long-term future needs.
Tonight I announce three new funds that will provide more than $40 billion for capital
investment in infrastructure, education and health to strengthen the economy.
In infrastructure — in roads, rail, ports and broadband. In education. In skills, TAFE
colleges and universities. In health and hospitals. And to build national productivity.
Mr Speaker, tonight I announce that the Government will invest $20 billion in a new
Building Australia Fund to finance roads, rail, ports and broadband across the nation.
Tonight I announce that the Government will invest $11 billion in a new Education
Investment Fund to finance skills, TAFE colleges and universities.
And tonight I announce the Government will invest $10 billion in a new Health and
Hospitals Fund to finance improvements to hospitals and the health care system.
Mr Speaker, this is a Government of nation builders.
We have no intention of hoarding the strong surplus for its own sake. This money is
not ours, it belongs to the Australian people.
11
We will make initial contributions to these funds from the 2007-08 and 2008-09 Budget
surpluses, and will add to them from future surpluses as appropriate.
Both the capital and earnings of these funds will be available for investment once
projects have been identified and rigorously evaluated, from next year onwards. This
will ensure significant investment in Australia’s future for many years.
The funds will be managed by the Future Fund Board of Guardians. There will be
rigorous assessment of projects by independent bodies before they are approved for
funding. For the Building Australia Fund, this will be Infrastructure Australia.
Building Australia Fund
The Building Australia Fund will finance critical national transport and
communications infrastructure, including roads, rail, ports and broadband, that is not
being provided by the private sector or the States.
The Building Australia Fund will receive an initial allocation of around $20 billion.
So that investment can begin immediately, tonight I announce that the Government
will allocate $75 million in 2007-08 for immediate feasibility studies on high-priority
transport projects across Australia. This will begin the necessary planning work for
key projects in advance of further deliberations by Infrastructure Australia.
Health and Hospitals Fund
Mr Speaker, the Health and Hospitals Fund will finance health infrastructure. Key
priorities include spending on hospitals, medical technology equipment, and medical
research facilities and projects. The Fund will receive an initial allocation of $10 billion.
We need to reverse the cutback in public hospital funding by the Commonwealth now.
That’s why the Government will provide an extra $500 million to the States through
the Australian Health Care Agreement by 30 June 2008.
Education Investment Fund
Mr Speaker, the Education Investment Fund will finance capital investment in higher
education and vocational education and training.
It will receive an initial allocation of around $11 billion, including $6 billion from the
Higher Education Endowment Fund.
Our education infrastructure is in urgent need of attention, right now. So tonight I
announce that the Government will provide additional capital funding of $500 million
before the end of this financial year, to help universities upgrade and maintain
teaching and research facilities.
12
COAG Reform Fund
Where funds are used to finance capital projects with the States, they will be
distributed to the States from the three new funds I have just announced through a
new Council of Australian Governments (COAG) Reform Fund.
The COAG Reform Fund will also distribute funding provided in future budgets to the
States for recurrent expenditure in areas of COAG national reforms, through new
National Partnership payments.
In 2008-09, the States will receive $78.6 billion in total payments, an increase of
4.8 per cent. And new financial arrangements will allow all levels of government to
work together to improve outcomes and reduce costs.
Future Fund
The Government will meet its commitments to the Future Fund to pay the
superannuation liabilities of Commonwealth Public Servants. The Government will
invest $3.9 billion into the Future Fund to help it reach its target by 2020.
Australia’s Future Tax System
Mr Speaker, a modern economy demands a more modern tax system, which helps
build the nation.
We need a tax system that is fairer, that is simpler, that better rewards people for their
hard work, that responds to our environmental and demographic challenges, that
makes us internationally competitive, and that creates the incentives to invest in our
productive capacity. One that supports national prosperity beyond the mining boom.
Tonight, I confirm the most comprehensive review of Australia’s tax system since
World War 2. The Australia’s Future Tax System (AFTS) review will be reporting
progressively from this July through to the end of 2009.
CONCLUSION
Mr Speaker, the longer our nation’s economic challenges are neglected, the harder it
will be to deal with them. In implementing our new vision for the nation’s economic
future, we don’t have a moment to waste.
I’m confident Australians will see this as the Budget our nation now needs, to beat
inflation, and lay the foundation for future growth.
It is the beginning of a long term plan to build a stronger economy that delivers for
working families.
13
A coherent package of reforms based on four principles: honouring our commitments;
delivering for working families; investing in the future; and beginning the new era of
economic responsibility we need, to sustain growth in challenging times.
Mr Speaker, the Rudd Government’s first Budget lays the foundation for a modern
and competitive economy that can meet the challenges of the 21st century with
optimism, and with confidence.
It is a Labor Budget for the nation. For Australia’s future. For all Australians.
I commend the Bill to the House
